# Scientific consensus
1. Human industrial activity moves carbon from sequestered organic remains into the atmosphere as carbon-based greenhouse gases.
2. This extraction has rapidly accelerated alongside Earth's burgeoning human population following medical advances  and intensive, industrially-assisted farming.
3. CO2 in the atmosphere rose from 220ppm in 1750 to 420ppm in 2020, corresponding to a 1.5C warming of global average surface temperature over that period. Hydrocarbons (primarily methane), though produced in much smaller quantities, are much more potent insulators and also contribute to human-induced climate change.
4. This warming could result in the rapid loss of permanent surface ice and widespread shifts of climate zones, causing untold but catastrophic disruption to human society.
5. These changes are likely to be stronger in the tropics, which are mostly inhabited by developing nations.
6. Human-induced climate change therefore comprises a global civil emergency which we must collectively manage.

## Missing from the consensus
- Earth's climate is an immense dynamic system with an inexorable cooling bias, and with a history of changes far more dramatic than what we see today.
- For most of Earth's history, CO2 levels were higher than at present. Average atmospheric CO2 concentration since multicellular life began is around 1500ppm, around 3.5 times higher than the current 420ppm. During evolutionary radiations such as the Cambrian, CO2 has been closer to 4500ppm - over ten times the present levels. Indeed, high levels of CO2 during the Carboniferous allowed vascular plants to raise atmospheric oxygen to 32%, enabling the evolution of numerous megafauna. This resulted in the greatest sequestration of carbon yet discovered on Earth.
- Since life first appeared on Earth, 80% of the time the surface has been ice-free; the remaining 20% is therefore characterized as "ice ages". These ice ages consist of widespread glaciations interspersed with periods of glacial retreat ("interglacial periods").
- Human civilization has occurred entirely during the Pleistocene Ice Age, specifically the current interglacial period, the Quaternary.
- The most recently-evolved photosynthetic process (C4) concentrates CO2 around the chloroplasts, enabling higher-efficiency photosynthesis. This high-efficiency carbohydrate production is found in all cereal crops, and underpins human civilization. However, C4 requires a minimum atmospheric CO2 concentration of 180ppm, below which threshhold the biological processes that concentrate CO2 cannot keep up with the plant's basal energy needs, killing the plant.   
- Earth's biome continuously sequesters carbon by removing it from the atmosphere and producing carbohydrates that are used by all lifeforms for fuel and as inputs to various metabolic syntheses. Eventually this process sequesters sufficient carbon that the atmosphere cannot trap enough heat to maintain surface temperatures favorable to life, precipitating an ice age.
- Several times this process has resulted in global cooling sufficient to produce pole-to-pole ice, though debate continues over whether there was a slushy band around the equator or global glaciation. The preponderance of geological evidence indicates that during the most recent global ice advance (the Cryogenian) glaciers covered the globe, with an equatorial ice sheet kilometers deep. Eventually, tectonic activity forces carbon back into the atmosphere, warming begins, the ice recedes, and new species radiate across the globe.   

## Well what's wrong with that?
- Earth's climate changes. We can't even control our own contributions to it, so how can we expect to ever control the climate itself? Thus, the current climate regime will change, and there are only two directions: colder and hotter. If we get much colder, the interglacial will end with a massive glaciation, likely covering most land in the northern hemisphere. If we get warmer, the rest of the permanent ice will melt, and the Pleistocene will finally end. The end of ice ages is typically followed by huge radiations of new species; tetrapods, the basic model of terrestrial animals, evolved following a major ice age. As temperatures rise, so does atmospheric moisture, producing a warmer, wetter world. Yes, some areas with currently favorable climates will desertify, but there is no escaping the fact that warmer air holds more water, is more turbulent, and thereby produces more rain.
